draft/patterns_of_distributed_transation.md, before:

---
title: "Patterns of Distributed Transation"
date: 2021-11-10T15:13:17+11:00
draft: true
---

A distributed transaction is a set of operations on data that is performed across two or more data repositories. Consider 2 UPDATE SQL operations need to be performed across 2 seperate databases where both operations need to be either successful or failed. In the case, SQL Transaction which is supported on a single node is no longer sufficient.

# Two-Phase Commit Protocol (2PC)

In such transaction processing across multiple nodes, a Two-Phase Commit Protocol is sometimes implemented to coordinate all participated processes in a distributed transaction on whether to commit or abort and roll back the transaction.

The protocol consists 2 phases:

1. Prepare phase
In this phase a coordinator node prepares all partipated processes on their local node. If such process is successful on a single node, a "Yes" vote is responded to the coordinator.

2. Commit phase
In this phase, the coordinator node sends a commit command to all partipated nodes to commit the prepared processes.

![2pc example](https://jgao.io/2pc-example.png)

2PC is a strongly consistent protocol with trade in availability. During the 2PC stage, data records from all participants must be locked to prevent conflicts from concurrent writes. This trade-off introduces a number of issues:

- Some failures can result in deadlock leading to some participants never being able to resolve their transactions

- After participants send an agreement message to the coordinator, data is blocked until a commit or rollback is received. This can be very expensive and cause performance bottleneck

- The protocol is complicated to implement which often leads to maintainance overheads

## The CAP Theory

As there is no perfect system. As software engineer, one of the most important jobs is to make right trade-offs. The CAP Theory states that any distributed data store can only provide two of the following three guarantees:

- Consistency, every read receives the the latest state of data

- Availablity, every request receives a response without the guarantee that the data represents the latest state

- Partition Tolerance, system continoue to operate despite messages being dropped or delayed impacted by network between nodes

This means that in a distributed transaction where requests sent to multiple nodes must be all or nothing, if a network partition failure occurs, the system needs to decide either cancel the operation in which availablity decreases or proceed with the operation but risk inconsistency.

2PC is a CP protocol. It provides strong consistency to allow data modified across multiple nodes but cannot guarantee the availability of the data.

# Outbox Pattern

Commit message:

updated event sourcing article, prgressing patterns to distributed transaction

draft/patterns_of_distributed_transation.md, after:

---
title: "Patterns of Distributed Transation"
date: 2021-11-10T15:13:17+11:00
draft: true
---

A distributed transaction is a set of operations on data that is performed across two or more data repositories. Consider 2 UPDATE SQL operations need to be performed across 2 seperate databases where both operations need to be either successful or failed. In the case, SQL Transaction which is supported on a single node is no longer sufficient.

# Two-Phase Commit Protocol (2PC)

In such transaction processing across multiple nodes, a Two-Phase Commit Protocol is sometimes implemented to coordinate all participated processes in a distributed transaction on whether to commit or abort and roll back the transaction.

The protocol consists 2 phases:

1. Prepare phase
In this phase a coordinator node prepares all partipated processes on their local node. If such process is successful on a single node, a "Yes" vote is responded to the coordinator.

2. Commit phase
In this phase, the coordinator node sends a commit command to all partipated nodes to commit the prepared processes.

![2pc example](https://jgao.io/2pc-example.png)

2PC is a strongly consistent protocol with trade in availability. During the 2PC stage, data records from all participants must be locked to prevent conflicts from concurrent writes. This trade-off introduces a number of issues:

- Some failures can result in deadlock leading to some participants never being able to resolve their transactions

- After participants send an agreement message to the coordinator, data is blocked until a commit or rollback is received. This can be very expensive and cause performance bottleneck

- The protocol is complicated to implement which often leads to maintainance overheads

## The CAP Theorem

As there is no perfect system. As software engineer, one of the most important jobs is to make right trade-offs. The CAP theorem states that any distributed data store can only provide two of the following three guarantees:

- Consistency, every read receives the the latest state of data

- Availablity, every request receives a response without the guarantee that the data represents the latest state

- Partition Tolerance, system continue to operate despite messages being dropped or delayed caused by network between nodes

This means that in a distributed transaction where requests sent to multiple nodes must be all or nothing. If a network partition failure occurs, the system needs to decide either cancel the operation in which availablity decreases or proceed with the operation but risk inconsistency.

## Eventual Consistency


2PC is a CP protocol. It provides strong consistency allowing data modified across multiple nodes but cannot guarantee the availability of the data. Although 2PC is a general pattern to solve distributed transaction problems, there are other alternative patterns which may fit what you need for your software solution.

# Outbox Pattern

The Outbox Pattern solves the problem when a transaction includes multiple writes to local database and message queues. For example, `CreateUser` command requires both insertion of a user object to the database and publishment of an event `UserCreated` to and event stream.

![outbox-scenario](https://jgao.io/outbox-example-1.png)

In this scenario, both actions performed by the User service needs to consistently succeed or fail. 2PC could be implemented but adds unecessary complexity.

Outbox Pattern provides consistency by using an additional database table as an "Outbox". Messages are added to the Outbox together with the write to the local database
